The invention relates to a roadable aircraft vehicle and related systems. An example roadable aircraft vehicle includes a vehicle drive system including an engine and gearbox selectively engageable with an automotive driveline  and at least one propeller , a user interface including a display  for controlling the drive system  in an automotive mode including a steering wheel and in a flight mode including a control stick , a control system for switching between the flight mode and the automotive mode, and a system  for locking the propeller during the automotive mode. The invention also relates to aircraft systems and elements such as an airfoil  having a nominal profile, a folding wing , and an occupant crash protection system for an aircraft 
SUBSTANCE: invention relates to aircraft engineering, particularly, to propellers of aircraft power plants. Propeller comprises two blades folded in the screw rotation plane, a bushing for installation on the drive shaft, one blade is connected to the bushing without possibility of rotation in the screw rotation plane. Second blade is made with possibility of rotation relative to the axis that does not coincide with the screw rotation axis, with the blade support in the retracted and working positions in the appropriate bearing surfaces of the bushing. Propeller comprises remote locks for fixation of the folded blade in the retracted and operating positions and at least one damping device for damping the impact of the folded blade on the propeller hub when moving it from the working position to the folded and in the reverse direction.
The invention relates to a magnetic bearing for generating magnetic forces. A configuration of electromagnetic poles and of permanent magnetic poles which, to the greatest possible extent, is planar enables the generation of a magnetic flux in the air gaps toward the rotor, also in the de-energized state. If this flux is modulated using a control flux, magnetic forces can be exerted upon the rotor for the purpose of providing magnetic support. This configuration makes it possible to provide magnetic bearings of a simple mechanical design.
An improved flywheel system for storing energy and providing the stored energy includes a rotor on a centrally located shaft. The shaft is positioned through support bearings. A magnetic off-loader provides a magnetic force to move the shaft axially in regard to the bearings. A feedback control system, provided to reduce bearing loads on the bearing, comprises a sensor mounted in a bearing housing positioned to measure the distance of a gap between a top end of the shaft and a lower surface of the sensor. In response to changes in the distance the sensor sends an electrical signal to a controller which in turn provides variable electric current to the magnetic off-loader which then provides a magnetic lifting force to the rotor on the shaft to minimize bearing load.