The invention relates to a roadable aircraft vehicle and related systems. An example roadable aircraft vehicle includes a vehicle drive system including an engine and gearbox selectively engageable with an automotive driveline  and at least one propeller , a user interface including a display  for controlling the drive system  in an automotive mode including a steering wheel and in a flight mode including a control stick , a control system for switching between the flight mode and the automotive mode, and a system  for locking the propeller during the automotive mode. The invention also relates to aircraft systems and elements such as an airfoil  having a nominal profile, a folding wing , and an occupant crash protection system for an aircraft 
SUBSTANCE: invention relates to aircraft engineering, particularly, to propellers of aircraft power plants. Propeller comprises two blades folded in the screw rotation plane, a bushing for installation on the drive shaft, one blade is connected to the bushing without possibility of rotation in the screw rotation plane. Second blade is made with possibility of rotation relative to the axis that does not coincide with the screw rotation axis, with the blade support in the retracted and working positions in the appropriate bearing surfaces of the bushing. Propeller comprises remote locks for fixation of the folded blade in the retracted and operating positions and at least one damping device for damping the impact of the folded blade on the propeller hub when moving it from the working position to the folded and in the reverse direction.
The invention relates to a magnetic bearing for generating magnetic forces. A configuration of electromagnetic poles and of permanent magnetic poles which, to the greatest possible extent, is planar enables the generation of a magnetic flux in the air gaps toward the rotor, also in the de-energized state. If this flux is modulated using a control flux, magnetic forces can be exerted upon the rotor for the purpose of providing magnetic support. This configuration makes it possible to provide magnetic bearings of a simple mechanical design.
An improved flywheel system for storing energy and providing the stored energy includes a rotor on a centrally located shaft. The shaft is positioned through support bearings. A magnetic off-loader provides a magnetic force to move the shaft axially in regard to the bearings. A feedback control system, provided to reduce bearing loads on the bearing, comprises a sensor mounted in a bearing housing positioned to measure the distance of a gap between a top end of the shaft and a lower surface of the sensor. In response to changes in the distance the sensor sends an electrical signal to a controller which in turn provides variable electric current to the magnetic off-loader which then provides a magnetic lifting force to the rotor on the shaft to minimize bearing load.


1. An improved flywheel system for storing energy and providing the stored energy comprising: wherein the improvement comprises a feedback control system comprising a sensor mounted in the upper bearing housing, said sensor measuring the distance of a gap between a top end of the upper shaft and a lower surface of the sensor, the sensor generating an electrical signal that changes in value in relationship to said distance, the electrical signal from the sensor processed by a controller, said controller provides variable electric current to the electro-magnet within the magnetic off-loader so as to vary a magnetic lifting force applied to the rotor.

a. a rotor having a centrally located upper shaft and a centrally located lower shaft mounted thereto, said rotor enclosed in a sealed housing,
b. an upper bearing housing disposed within an upper portion of the housing section and a lower bearing housing disposed within a lower portion of the housing section;
c. an upper bearing located in the upper bearing housing and a lower bearing located in the lower bearing housing, the upper shaft being positioned in the upper bearing and the lower shaft being positioned in the lower bearing, said shafts being moveable axially through a central opening in each of said bearings, and
d. an a magnetic off-loader including an electromagnet configured to provide a magnetic force to move the rotor axially in regard to the upper and lower bearings,
2. The improved flywheel system of claim 1 further including a hybrid motor-generator comprising a permanent magnet motor-generator portion in combination with a homo-polar motor generator portion.

3. The improved flywheel system of claim 1 wherein the rotor is a steel disc with a thickness less than about 3 inches and a diameter of less than about 3 feet.

4. The improved flywheel system of claim 1 further including a stator winding configured to be converted between parallel windings and series windings.

5. The improved flywheel system of claim 4 wherein the parallel windings provide a first voltage output and the series windings provide a second voltage output greater than the first voltage output.

6. A flywheel system for storing energy and providing the stored energy comprising multiple flywheel units, the multiple units stacked vertically within a mounting frame, each unit comprising

a. a rotor having a centrally located upper shaft and a centrally located lower shaft mounted thereto, said rotor enclosed in a sealed housing,
b. an upper bearing housing disposed within an upper portion of the housing section and a lower bearing housing disposed within a lower portion of the housing section;
c. an upper bearing located in the upper bearing housing and a lower bearing located in the lower bearing housing, the upper shaft being positioned in the upper bearing and the lower shaft being positioned in the lower bearing, said shafts being moveable axially through a central opening in each of said bearings, and
d. a magnetic off-loader including an electromagnet configured to provide a magnetic force to move the rotor axially in regard to the upper and lower bearings, and
e. a feedback control system comprising i. a sensor mounted in the upper bearing housing, said sensor measuring the distance of a gap between a top end of the upper shaft and a lower surface of the sensor, the sensor generating an electrical signal that changes in value in relationship to said distance, ii. the electrical signal from the sensor processed by a controller, said controller sending an electric current to the electromagnet within the magnetic off-loader so as to vary a magnetic force applied to the rotor so as to move the rotor axially.
7. A system for minimizing bearing load in an apparatus having a rotating assembly including a shaft, said shaft having first and second spaced apart portions thereof passing through central axial openings in the first and second bearings, said system comprising:

a. said first bearing located in a first bearing housing and the second bearing located in a second bearing housing, the first portion of the shaft being positioned in the opening in the first bearing and the second portion of the shaft being positioned in the opening in the second bearing, said shaft being moveable axially through said first and second central openings in each of said bearings, and
b. a magnetic off-loader including an electromagnet configured to provide a magnetic force to move the rotating assembly axially in regard to the first and second bearings, and
c. a feedback control system comprising i. a sensor mounted in the first bearing housing, said sensor measuring the distance of a gap between a first end of the shaft and a sensing surface of the sensor, the sensor generating and electrical signal that changes in value in relationship to said distance, ii. the electrical signal from the sensor processed by a controller, said controller sending an electric current to an electromagnet within the magnetic off-loader so as to vary the magnetic force applied to the rotating assembly and to move the rotating assembly axially in relationship to the first and second bearing.